# Arun_REU
This is a repository for Arun's REU work on the disGNET dataset for his ACRES REU 2021 Internship. 

After reorganizing the work done, there are three key python notebooks I made: one for my exploration of association types, another for exploration of the curated dataset, and a final for the results of the machine learning model. 

AssociationTypes.ipynb makes use of combinationHeatmap.png (a picture of the old heatmap on all association types using combinations rather than permutations, for reference), hierarchy.PNG (a picture provided by DisGeNET demonstrating the association type hierarchy), geneDiseaseNetwork (the whole network of gene-disease associations), diseaseAttributes (a dataset providing more information on the diseases), geneAttributes.tsv (a dataset providing more information on the genes), disease_mappings.tsv (a dataset used to help format diseases in a DOID format), ontology.py (a file created by my mentor to help propagate the diseases), and doid.obo (a file containing the information necessary for disease propagation). Four files are created (plus multiple gmt files) from running this python notebook. First, gmt files are created for each association type using the original dataset. Then, a dataset file called relabeled dataset is made (Propagated Recategorized Dataset unique Biomarker). After this, a dataset file called AllBiomarker.csv is made (Propagated Recategorized Dataset All Biomarker). Then, gmt files for the 5 association types in this dataset are created in case this dataset will be used in a subsequent machine learning process. Next, a dataset called DesiredDataArjunAssociations.tsv is made (Propagated Recategorized Dataset All Biomarker with Association Type Filtering). Finally, a dataset called DesiredDataArjunAssociationAllDisease.tsv is made (Propagated Recategorized Dataset All Biomarker with no Association Type Filtering). Overall, this python notebook summarizes the totality of my work on association types from the original dataset. For further work, DOIDs can be selected from DesiredDataArjunAssociations.tsv to be used in a supervised machine learning model to predict if genes from one association type can be used to predict genes associated to another association type for a particular disease. 

Curated Dataset Exploration.ipynb makes use of curated_gene_disease_associations.tsv (the curated data file), diseaseAttributes (a dataset providing more information on the diseases), geneAttributes.tsv (a dataset providing more information on the genes), relabeledDataset.csv (a dataset of the propagated recategorized unique biomarker data created in the Association Type Python notebook), disease_mappings.tsv (a dataset used to help format diseases in a DOID format), ontology.py (a file created by my mentor to help propagate the diseases), and doid.obo (a file containing the information necessary for disease propagation). three files are created (plus multiple gmt files) from running this python notebook. First, gmt files are created for each source using the curated dataset to be used to create labels for the supervised machine learning model. Next, a file called DesiredDataArjun.tsv is made (Propagated Curated Dataset with multiple filters). Also, a file called  
DesiredDataArjunAllDisease.tsv is created (Propagated Curated Dataset with no filtering). Finally, after my mentor sent back a file called DesiredDataArjunAllDisease_filtered.tsv (a file with the desired DOIDs for the machine learning model tagged with a '#' symbol), selected DOIDS.csv is made, which only contains the DOIDs to be used for the machine learning process. Overall, this python notebook summarizes the totality of my work on curated data.

Machine Learning Results.ipynb makes use of curated_gene_disease_associations.tsv (the curated data file), selected DOIDS.csv (a dataset which only contains the DOIDs to be used for the machine learning approach), all of the results of the supervised machine leanring model (placed in a folder called eval), disease_mappings.tsv (a dataset used to help format diseases in a DOID format), ontology.py (a file created by my mentor to help propagate the diseases), and doid.obo (a file containing the information necessary for disease propagation). Running this notebook does not create any files; it only outputs heatmaps that help to analyze the results of the machine learning model. The notebook also includes my conclusion, list of next steps, references, and acknowledgements. 


This project was possible due to the unwavering support from my mentors, Arjun Krishnan and Anna Yannakopoulos, and the ACRES Program Staff. 

Note: Certain files were removed from the directory to their large size. Mainly, the geneDiseaseNetwork.tsv from DisGENET was too large to be uploaded into the directory. This can be easily accessed through disgenet.org. One can also find all the datasets relating to variant data from this website. 
